\subsection{Repairing terms}\label{chick-design-repair-term}

The repair algorithm for terms is described formally in
Figures~\ref{fig:repair-term-1}, \ref{fig:repair-term-2},
\ref{fig:repair-term-two-1}, and~\ref{fig:repair-term-two-2} using the following
judgments:

{
  \[
    {\turnstile
      { \dcontext{E}{\delta_E}{\Gamma}{\delta_\Gamma} }
      {\repair{t}{\delta_t}{\tau}{\delta_\tau}}
    }
  \]
  % \[
  %   {\turnstile
  %     { \dcontext{E}{\delta_E}{\Gamma}{\delta_\Gamma} }
  %     {\genericrepair{t}{\delta_t}{\tau}}
  %   }
  % \]
  \[
    {\turnstile
      { \dcontext{E}{\delta_E}{\Gamma}{\delta_\Gamma} }
      {\repairTermWithoutType{t}{\delta_t}}
    }
  \]
}%
%
The first judgment (described in Figures~\ref{fig:repair-term-1}
and~\ref{fig:repair-term-2}) describes how a term is repaired when we know both
its old type $\tau$, and how that type got modified $\delta_\tau$.  It is
syntax-directed by the structure of $\delta_\tau$.  The second judgment
(described in Figures~\ref{fig:repair-term-two-1}
and~\ref{fig:repair-term-two-2}) describes how a term is repaired when we no
longer make decisions based on its old type and type diff: this happens for
constructs whose type does not inform us about the type of its constituents (for
instance, function application), and for simple terms (holes, universes,
variables).

\paragraph{Notation} The first judgment can be read as follows:

\begin{itemize}

  \item \textbf{Top}: Given that a term $t$ had type $\tau$ in local context
$\Gamma$ and global environment $E$,

  \item \textbf{Bottom left}: and the global environment underwent modification
$\delta_{E}$,

  \item \textbf{Bottom left}: and the local context underwent modification
$\delta_{\Gamma}$,

  \item \textbf{Bottom right}: and the type underwent modification
$\delta_{\tau}$,

  \item \textbf{Right}: then, we suggest to repair the term $t$ with diff
$\out{\delta_{t}}$.

\end{itemize}

\noindent The second judgment can be read analogously, but does not have access
to typing information for the term being repaired.  Importantly, the first
judgment assumes the diff $\delta_\tau$ is repaired already: it is the
responsibility of the caller to ensure so.

\input{chick-repair-term-diff-directed}

\input{chick-repair-term-term-directed}
